(cheery music)
All right, in this video,
we're going to start talking about serverless functions.
So the thing about Gatsby is that
when you build Gatsby it just kicks it out
to HTML pages, CSS files,
and JavaScript in order to handle the page transitions
and then any other custom functionality that we create.
But if you need to do something on the back end,
you can't really do that.
Like we have sanity and that handles almost all
of our use cases for creating and updating
and pulling in data.
But what if you need to do something like send email.
That has to happen on the server side
and when you reach a point in your website where you say,
"okay I need to make a contact form.
I wanna send an email,
or I wanna do something on the server side."
We're sort of out of luck with Gatsby.
However, Gatsby works very well
with something called serverless functions.
Now serverless functions are very similar
to just running a node server.
Except that instead of running an entire server
what that does lots and lots of stuff.
A serverless function is just a function
that does one thing and then shuts itself down
after the fact and you could use serverless functions
with literally any framework out there,
you just have to have a URL that you can ping
but we are going to be using Netlify functions
because Netlify does a really good job at hosting Gatsby.
And another part of their offering
is hosting serverless functions.
So all the code that we're going to write here today,
it's just gonna be a regular, no JS code.
You can host these serverless functions
wherever you want.
Netlify makes it really easy.
Both locally development,
as well as when we deploy it.
So let's get started with that.
First thing we wanna do is make a new folder.
If you don't already have a folder
in the very root called functions,
we need to create a netlify.toml file
in the root of our directory.
So netlify.toml
and we need to tell it where those functions are living.
So it works like this,
do square brackets build and then this is important, tab,
functions is equal to quotes functions forward slash,
and that will just tell it where the functions are.
Now, take a look at your package jason.
We've been running NPM start which runs NPM develop
and then that internal run Gatsby develop.
We need to now run NPM run Netlify
which will run Netlify dev.
And that will both under the hood run our NPM run start
but it will also set itself up properly
for running our serverless functions.
So let's go back to our Gatsby directory here,
killed the build.
You should see nothing is working right now
in NPM run Netlify.
And it runs Netlify dev and it should give us a URL.
There we go, local hosts eight,
eight, eight, eight.
So that is the URL in which we are now going
to be running our website off of.
It previously was local hosts 8,000
but Netlify dev will proxy our Gatsby website.
And look it's doing all the regular Gatsby stuff
for us under the hood.
So make sure that you go to the local host eight,
eight, eight, eight.
While that starts up,
eventually, actually we should
just see our Gatsby website pop up here.
We wanna make our first serverless function.
So go into your functions and for each of the functions
that we have you wanna create a new folder.
Let's just say, hello.
And then inside of that, you need to make a JS file
that is the same name as the folder that it's in.
So the folders name, hello, the JavaScript name is hello.
And in here you code what is referred to as a handler.
Now these handlers are just no JS.
They're actually Amazon serverless functions under the hood.
So if you ever looking for any documentation on this,
I found that the Netlify docs weren't the best for this
because you can just go straight
to the Amazon serverless functions
and it will give you the same things for that.
So we say exports dot handler is equal to,
it's an a sync function, and we get two arguments.
We get the event that happened and the context.
And then back from that,
we will return status code.
Oh no.
We return an object where the status code is 200
and the body is going to say hello or whatever
it is that you want.
You can also console log the event up here.
If you want to see what's going on.
Now in order to visit this URL, hello dot JS.
We go to local host eight, eight,
eight forward slash dot Netlify.
Forward slash functions and then forward slash hello.
And oh, it says not function not found.
Let's take a look here.
A Netlify functions low, okay.
So it is telling us that we went
to forward slash low.
That should work.
Sometimes you need to restart it.
Let's try and give it a restart.
All right, it's up and running refresh.
There we go, hello.
So just needed a bit of a restart.
Sometimes things need that.
And that is the very basics of a serverless function.
Now inside of this file right here,
you can return really anything you want.
So you can npm install any package.
You can require anything.
You can parse anything.
And at the end of the day,
you can finally just return the data that you want.
So what we're gonna be doing is
we're gonna be creating a serverless function
called place order.
And that is going to use node mailer to actually hook up
to an external email service and send those emails out.
So go into our functions folder here,
and we'll make a new folder called place order,
and we'll make a place order dot JS inside of there.
Now sometimes your serverless functions are so big
or you want them to be their own thing
that you wanna have your own package jason
for a serverless function.
Now Netlify makes it really simple where if you want,
you can use packages in your,
in this package, jason.
However if you want it to,
you can have your own package jason just
for this place order.
And I think that makes a lot of sense
for your functions that you have.
So what I want to do is I'm gonna open up a new tab.
So leave your NPM run Netlify running,
and we're going to go to Z master.
So I'm gonna go to my master Gatsby.
I'm gonna go into my Gatsby folder
and then go into my functions folder.
I'm gonna go into my place order folder.
There we go and just LL or LS dash L.
You can see we only ever place ordered dot js
so we can type NPM init
and just hold down the enter key until you're done.
And that will create a package jason.
Then we only need one dependence here.
It's npm install, node mailer,
and that is going to allow us
to send emails with JavaScript.
(hums)
There we go.
And we look in the package, Jason,
and you see, here we go.
Our dependency of node mailer has been installed in there
and let's open up our place order dot JS
and we need to require node mailer.
So unfortunately we can't use the import syntax here,
at least at the time of recording we can't.
So you have to use the older common JS syntax
so that's fine.
It's just one line.
So node mailer equals require node mailer.
Then we need to create a transport for node mailer.
Cost transporter is equal
to node mailer dot create transport
and curly bracket, okay.
Then inside of here,
we put all of the authentication variables
that we need in order to connect to it.
So normally what you do is you would sign up
for what's called a transactional email service
and that's a service will send one off emails for you.
And I really like using one called postmark
and they are really good.
There's one called SendGrid.
That is also very good.
There's dozens of them out there.
And you would sign in and they will give you a username
and a password.
And you can send transactional email with them,
however, rather than getting into that
and putting credit card numbers in and all that stuff.
What you can do is you can use this etherial.email
and this is actually created by the node mail folks.
And it allows you just
to create a temporary testing email account,
which is exactly what you need when you're in development.
So this should be require.
So go into here and we'll say the host is going to be.
Let's create ethereal email account.
There we go, we just created an account.
Our name is Geraldine cozy.
That's nice.
Username is this email address and the password is that.
So it actually,
it actually just gives us the node mail config right here,
which is great.
So just we can just go ahead and copy that
and use the SMTP dot ethereal email.
The port is five 87.
That's going to be true for almost all
of your email sending.
And then the authentication is your username, your password.
Now you don't really want to hard code these things
because obviously in production,
you're not going to be using ethereal email.
You're going to use postmark or something like that.
So where can we put variables that need to be changed out
depending on their environment
that goes in our dot ENV file.
So we can go into our dot EMB file
and we can just make some more mail underscore host
is equal to.
Let's grab this mail underscore user,
Geraldine 92 and password is this.
And mail under score pass is equal to that.
All right, then we can go back here and replace these.
So our host is going to be processed dot ENV,
dot mail underscore host and the user.
You could also make the port in there,
but I'm just gonna leave that hard-coded cause
that's almost always what it is.
Underscore user and mail underscore pass.
Okay then let's just like test send an email.
So when somebody visits the serverless function,
we'll just take our trans porter
and we'll run the dot send mail function.
It has a from.
We'll say from slicks slices,
slick example.com.
Always use the example.com
if you're filling in a dummy email address
that you don't actually care where it goes to.
'Cause example.com is actually set aside for that.
If you use like, like poop.com,
somebody actually owns poop.com
and somebody will get those emails.
And if you accidentally send sensitive information,
then you're pooched.
So always use example.com when you're doing stuff like that.
To and this will be sent to whoever is the receiver.
So like right now, let's just say orders,
at example.com and we'll come out and swap that out
with the actual user's email address, subject a new order.
And we'll put the name in there as well.
And then the HTML for that,
it's gonna be let's just back text paragraph.
Your new pizza order is here.
Okay so that's obviously really simple
but that's the very basics for sending email with no jazz.
So we'll come back and do a little bit more.
So now I believe if we, oh no,
we forgot to code our handler.
So one, I'm sorry.
One more exports dot handler is equal
to a sink and you might be asking like,
why is this not export default or export con's handler?
This is cause it's common JS and not ES modules.
So sync, we get our event,
we get our context
and then let's actually put this in the handler.
And we will say, we'll capture the result of that.
So cons info is equal to await.
So put it in a wait in front
of the transporter dot send email
and then we will just return an object.
And the status code is 200.
I think it's capital C on there
and the body will be not sure what's in info, we'll see.
Let's see what's in info.
You can also just console dot log the info
to see what the result of that is.
All right, so here we go.
We're gonna go to forward slash place order
and function not found.
(honks)
We gotta reach, restart the sucker,
that's weird they had to restart it.
It like, it knows that it's there,
but if for some reason you still have
to kill it, you restart.
All right, there we go.
Now it's restarted.
Boom function...
Invocation failed incorrect function response body.
Okay, Something.
Oh, you know why it's cause we returned a body object,
but here is the info.
And we could just send,
we could send that back as like stringify,
jason dot stringify info.
Let's try that before we refresh that page, though,
we should be able to go to our inbox
for this ethereal email.
So open mailbox
and here is our Geraldine 92.
This is your ethereal inbox.
That's not what we want.
Oh here it is orders dot example.com new order, open it up.
And here it is, here's the email.
So the email was actually sent and there's no difference
between this ethereal email
and actually using a transactional email service.
You would just switch out the credentials
and you'd be up and running.
Okay so let's try it again.
Now that I've changed jason stringified the results.
Refresh.
There we go.
So that's the actual response.
Now, if I go back to my email inbox,
I bet if I refresh this, here we go.
There's our new order.
It's now showing up.
So that's the very basics of serverless functions.
In the next video what we'll do is,
we'll figure out how do we take the user's order
from the client, send it to our serverless function
and then template out the HTML that displays
what they have in their order.